RSDK-8754 Refactor micro-rdk development setup docs (#3537)
viamrobotics/docs: docs/installation/viam-micro-server-dev.md

  - /installation/viam-micro-server-dev/
---

`viam-micro-server` is the lightweight version of
[`viam-server`](/architecture/rdk/) which can run on resource-limited
embedded systems (ESP32) that cannot run the fully-featured
`viam-server`.

This page provides instructions for configuring a development
environment for working with `viam-micro-server`, outlines the steps
for performing various development tasks, and provides troubleshooting

> and development tips to help organize and streamline work.

Reviewer: same below

{{< alert title="Looking to install viam-micro-server?" color="note" >}}

If you only want to install and use `viam-micro-server`, see [Install `viam-micro-server`](/installation/#install-viam-micro-server)
instead. The instructions below are for configuring a development
environment in order to:
 - Develop custom firmware which combines `viam-micro-server` with one or more modules.
 - Develop modules for `viam-micro-server`.
 - Develop `viam-micro-server` itself.

{{< /alert >}}

> ## Required Software

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Required software
```

1. Install `espup` and ESP development utilities with `cargo`:

   ```sh { class="command-line" data-prompt="$"}
   cargo install cargo-espflash cargo-generate espflash espup ldproxy
   ```

1. Use `espup` to download and install the ESP Rust toolchain:

   ```sh { class="command-line" data-prompt="$"}
   espup install -s -f /dev/null -v 1.76.0
   ```

{{< alert title="Note" color="tip" >}}
Prior versions of the above `espup` instructions created a file called `export-rs.sh` which needed to be sourced before proceeding.
That requirement [no longer applies](https://github.com/esp-rs/esp-idf-hal/issues/319#issuecomment-1785168921) for `viam-micro-server` development.
The above command redirects `espup`'s production of the setup script to `/dev/null` to avoid cluttering the home directory.
If you would like to instead retain the setup script, replace `/dev/null` in the above command with the location where you would like the script to be written, or remove the `-f /dev/null` entirely and the file will be written to `$HOME/export-esp.sh` by default.
{{< /alert >}}

> ## Development tasks

Reviewer 2: Let's try to think of this not as tasks but as things people would want to do. Maybe:
```suggestion
## Creating a project or module
```

> There are three main types of development tasks relevant for `viam-micro-server`:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
With the dev setup for `viam-micro-server`, you can:
```

> - Creating a project that combines `viam-micro-server` with one or more modules to produce a new firmware instance with expanded functionality.

Reviewer 2: I realize this was also a mistake in my suggestion but please make sure you read through suggestions before applying them.

```suggestion
- Create a project that combines `viam-micro-server` with one or more modules to produce a new firmware instance with expanded functionality.
```

Reviewer: sorry, normally do

> - Creating a project that combines `viam-micro-server` with one or more modules to produce a new firmware instance with expanded functionality.
> - Creating modules that can integrate with `viam-micro-server` to deliver new opt-in functionality or device support.
> - Working on `viam-micro-server` itself, to add features and fix bugs, or to produce a build for a specific ESP-IDF version or platform for which Viam does not offer a pre-built solution.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Creating a project that combines `viam-micro-server` with one or more modules to produce a new firmware instance with expanded functionality.
- Create modules that can integrate with `viam-micro-server` to deliver new opt-in functionality or device support.
- Work on `viam-micro-server` itself, to add features and fix bugs, or to produce a build for a specific ESP-IDF version or platform for which Viam does not offer a pre-built solution.
```

Reviewer: great change, sorry I didn't catch that

{{< tabs >}}
{{% tab name="Create a New Project" %}}

> 1.  Create a new machine and obtain its credentials

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1.  Create a new machine and obtain its credentials:
```

> - Navigate to [the Viam app](https://app.viam.com) and [add a new machine](/cloud/machines/#add-a-new-machine) in your desired location.

Reviewer 2: these aren't indented, I think there's a bug with that and that's probably why? Maybe just use regular text & paragraphs.

Reviewer: changed

    Click on the name of the machine to go to the machine's page, then select the **CONFIGURE** tab.

>     Select the part status dropdown to the right of your machine's name on the top of the page:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

    Then select the part status dropdown to the right of your machine's name on the top of the page and copy the **Machine cloud credentials**:
```

    {{<imgproc src="configure/machine-part-info.png" resize="500x" declaredimensions=true alt="Restart button on the machine part info dropdown">}}

>     Click the copy icon underneath **Machine cloud credentials**.

Reviewer 2: I think reorganizing is slightly better
```suggestion
```

>   `viam-micro-server` needs this JSON, which contains your machine part secret key and cloud app address, to connect to the [Viam app](https://app.viam.com).

Reviewer 2: The fact they're in JSON doesn't really matter and is detail the user doesn't need
```suggestion
  `viam-micro-server` needs these credentials, which contains your machine part secret key and cloud app address, to connect to the [Viam app](https://app.viam.com).
```

{{% snippet "secret-share.md" %}}

> 1.  Generate a new project skeleton from [this template](https://github.com/viamrobotics/micro-rdk/tree/main/templates/project):

Reviewer 2: numbers here are off

Reviewer: fixed I think

    ```sh { class="command-line" data-prompt="$"}
    cargo generate --git https://github.com/viamrobotics/micro-rdk.git
    ```

    Select `templates/project` when prompted. Give the project a name of your choice.
    Select `esp32` for **MCU**.
    If you wish to configure an `esp32-camera` or a `fake` camera as a component of your machine, select **true** for **include camera module and traits**.

    You will be prompted to paste your machine's `viam-server` robot JSON configuration into the terminal, which is the same thing as its machine cloud credentials.
    Paste in the credentials you obtained in step 1.

2.  Change directories into the generated project:

    ```sh { class="command-line" data-prompt="$"}
    cd <your-path-to/your-project-directory>
    ```

> 3.  If you wish to use revision control for this project, this is the best time to initialize a git repository and commit all the generated files, but be sure to exclude the generated `viam.json` file, which includes secrets:

Reviewer 2: more commonly used term
```suggestion
3.  If you wish to use version control for this project, this is the best time to initialize a git repository and commit all the generated files, but be sure to exclude the generated `viam.json` file, which includes secrets:
```

    Subsequent builds will be faster.

6.  Upload the generated firmware to your ESP32:

    Connect the ESP32 board you wish to flash to a USB port on your development machine, and run:

    ```sh { class="command-line" data-prompt="$"}
    make flash-esp32-bin
    ```

    When prompted, select the serial port that your ESP32 is connected to through a data cable.

    If successful, you will retain a serial connection to the board until you press `Ctrl-C`.
    To manage this connection, consider running it within a dedicated terminal session, or under `tmux` or `screen`.
    While the serial connection is live, you can also restart the currently flashed image with `Ctrl-R`.

{{< alert title="Note" color="tip" >}}

The above build and flash steps may be combined by using the `upload` target:

```sh { class="command-line" data-prompt="$"}
make upload
```

{{< /alert >}}

7.  Navigate to your new machine's page on [the Viam app](https://app.viam.com).
    If successful, **Live** should be displayed underneath **Last online**.

> 8.  You may now add any desired modules to the project by including them in the `[dependencies]` section of the `Cargo.toml` for the generated project.

Reviewer 2: the markup around that doesn't need to be added I think
```suggestion
8.  You may now add any desired modules to the project by including them in the `dependencies` section of the `Cargo.toml` for the generated project.
```

    After adding (or removing) a module or changing the version of a module, you must rerun steps 5-6 above in order to rebuild the firmware and reflash the device.

{{% /tab %}}
{{% tab name="Create a New Module" %}}

1. If you have not previously developed a module for `viam-micro-server`, please review the [module template README](https://github.com/viamrobotics/micro-rdk/tree/main/templates/module) and the [example module implementation walkthrough](https://github.com/viamrobotics/micro-rdk/blob/main/examples/modular-drivers/README.md) before continuing.

1. Generate a new module skeleton from [this template](https://github.com/viamrobotics/micro-rdk/tree/main/templates/module):

   ```sh { class="command-line" data-prompt="$"}
   cargo generate --git https://github.com/viamrobotics/micro-rdk.git
   ```

   Select `templates/module` when prompted, give the module a name of your choice, and answer any additional prompts.

1. Change directories into the generated tree:

   ```sh { class="command-line" data-prompt="$"}
   cd <your-path-to/your-module-directory>
   ```

> 1. If you wish to use revision control for the module, this is the best time to initialize a git repository and commit all the generated files.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. If you wish to use version control for the module, this is the best time to initialize a git repository and commit all the generated files.
```

   There are no secrets in a newly generated module repository:

   ```sh { class="command-line" data-prompt="$"}
   git add .
   git commit -m "initial commit"
   ```

1. Develop the module by defining `structs` which implement the necessary `traits` and adding tests and registration hooks for them, per the walkthrough.

> 1. To consume the module, follow the "Create a Project" workflow in a different directory, and register your module in the `[dependencies]` section of the project's `Cargo.toml` file, then build and flash the project.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. To consume the module, follow the "Create a Project" workflow in a different directory, and register your module in the `dependencies` section of the project's `Cargo.toml` file, then build and flash the project.
```

   The module will now be available for use by adding it to your machine configuration on the [Viam App](https://app.viam.com).

{{% /tab %}}
{{% tab name="viam-micro-server Development" %}}

> 1. If you have not done so before, clone the `viamrobotics/micro-rdk` git repository (optionally specifying a path for the new clone) and `cd` into the clone:

Reviewer 2: They'll know if they have done that ans skip the step as appropriate - I think fair to skip
```suggestion
1. Clone the `viamrobotics/micro-rdk` repository (optionally specifying a path for the new clone) and `cd` into the clone:
```

`viam-micro-server` is the lightweight version of [`viam-server`](/architecture/rdk/) which can run on resource-limited embedded systems (ESP32) that cannot run the fully-featured `viam-server`.

This page provides instructions for configuring a development environment for working with `viam-micro-server`, outlines the steps for performing various development tasks, and provides troubleshooting and development tips to help organize and streamline work.

{{< alert title="Looking to install viam-micro-server?" color="note" >}}
If you only want to install and use `viam-micro-server`, see [Install `viam-micro-server`](/installation/viam-micro-server-setup/#install-viam-micro-server) instead.
{{< /alert >}}

The instructions below are for configuring a development environment in order to:

- Develop custom firmware which combines `viam-micro-server` with one or more modules.
- Develop modules for `viam-micro-server`.
- Develop `viam-micro-server` itself.

> {{< /alert >}}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

This page provides instructions for configuring a development environment for working with `viam-micro-server`, outlines the steps for performing various development tasks, and provides troubleshooting and development tips to help organize and streamline work.

{{< alert title="Looking to install viam-micro-server?" color="note" >}}
If you only want to install and use `viam-micro-server`, see [Install `viam-micro-server`](/installation/viam-micro-server-setup/#install-viam-micro-server) instead.

> {{< /alert >}}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

   cd <your-path-to/your-viam-micro-server-clone>
   ```

1. Compile and run the project:

   The `viam-micro-server` can be built either for ESP32, or a native version can be built for testing purposes.

   {{< tabs >}}
   {{% tab name="Build and Flash an ESP32" %}}

   Compile the project for ESP32:

   ```sh { class="command-line" data-prompt="$"}
   make build-esp32-bin
   ```

   Please note that the first build may be fairly time consuming, as ESP-IDF must be cloned and built, and all dependent Rust crates must be fetched and built as well.
   Subsequent builds will be faster.

   Next, flash the generated firmware to your ESP32.

   Connect the ESP32 board you wish to flash to a USB port on your development machine, and run:

   ```sh { class="command-line" data-prompt="$"}
   make flash-esp32-bin
   ```

   When prompted, select the serial port that your ESP32 is connected to through a data cable.

   {{% /tab %}}
   {{% tab name="Run Natively" %}}

   The native server can be built and run with one command:

   ```sh { class="command-line" data-prompt="$"}
   make native
   ```

   {{% /tab %}}
   {{% /tabs %}}

{{% /tab %}}
{{% /tabs %}}

> For further details on `viam-micro-server` development, including credentials management and developer productivity suggestions, please see the (development technical notes page on GitHub)[TBD].

Reviewer: @acmorrow Is there a link I can add here or do we want to leave this out for now?

Author: The link can be populated when https://github.com/viamrobotics/micro-rdk/pull/320 is merged.

Reviewer: Ok thank you, I'll keep an eye on that! It looks like it's about to merge so I'll keep on eye on that the next few days and try to merge this with the link

Author: It merged, the link is https://github.com/viamrobotics/micro-rdk/blob/main/DEVELOPMENT.md

Reviewer: Thank you! Adding in

/bin/bash -c "$(curl -fsSL https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Homebrew/install/HEAD/install.sh)"
```

Then, install dependencies:

```sh { class="command-line" data-prompt="$"}
brew install cmake dfu-util ninja
```

    {{% /tab %}}
    {{% /tabs %}}

1. If you do not yet have a Rust environment installed, install it with `rustup`.

   ```sh { class="command-line" data-prompt="$"}
   curl --proto '=https' --tlsv1.2 -sSf https://sh.rustup.rs | sh
   ```

   Once completed, start a new shell instance, or run `. "$HOME/.cargo/env"` in the current one.

   See the [Rust Installation guide](https://www.rust-lang.org/tools/install) for more information and other installation methods.

1. Install `espup` and ESP development utilities with `cargo`:

   ```sh { class="command-line" data-prompt="$"}
   cargo install cargo-espflash cargo-generate espflash espup ldproxy
   ```

1. Use `espup` to download and install the ESP Rust toolchain:

   ```sh { class="command-line" data-prompt="$"}
   espup install -s -f /dev/null -v 1.76.0
   ```

>     {{< alert title="Note" color="tip" >}} Prior versions of the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    {{< alert title="Note" color="tip" >}} 
    Prior versions of the
```
and fix line spacing here to be one line break per sentence

   cargo generate --git https://github.com/viamrobotics/micro-rdk.git
   ```

   Select `templates/module` when prompted, give the module a name of
   your choice, and answer any additional prompts.

1. Change directories into the generated tree:

   ```sh { class="command-line" data-prompt="$"}
   cd <your-path-to/your-module-directory>
   ```

1. If you wish to use revision control for the module, this is the
   best time to initialize a git repository and commit all the
   generated files. There are no secrets in a newly generated module
   repository:

   ```sh { class="command-line" data-prompt="$"}
   git add .
   git commit -m "initial commit"
   ```

1. Develop the module by defining `structs` which implement the
   necessary `traits` and adding tests and registration hooks for
   them, per the walkthrough.

1. To consume the module, follow the "Create a Project" workflow in a
   different directory, and register your module in the
   `[dependencies]` section of the project's `Cargo.toml` file, then
   build and flash the project. The module will now be available for
   use by adding it to your machine configuration on `app.viam.com`.

{{% /tab %}}

> {{% tab name="Viam Micro Server Development" %}}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{{% tab name="viam-micro-server Development" %}}
```

   {{< tabs >}}
   {{% tab name="Build and Flash an ESP32" %}}

   Compile the project for ESP32

   ```sh { class="command-line" data-prompt="$"}
   make build-esp32-bin
   ```

   Please note that the first build may be fairly time consuming, as
   ESP-IDF must be cloned and built, and all dependent Rust crates
   must be fetched and built as well. Subsequent builds will be
   faster.

   Next, flash the generated firmware to your ESP32.

   Connect the ESP32 board you wish to flash to a USB port on your
   development machine, and run:

   ```sh { class="command-line" data-prompt="$"}
   make flash-esp32-bin
   ```

   When prompted, select the serial port that your ESP32 is connected
   to through a data cable.

   {{% /tab %}}
   {{% tab name="Run Natively" %}}

   The native server can be built and run with one command

   ```sh { class="command-line" data-prompt="$"}
   make native
   ```

   {{% /tab %}}
   {{% /tabs %}}

{{% /tab %}}
{{% /tabs %}}

For further details on `viam-micro-server` development, including
credentials management and developer productivity suggestions, please

> see the (development technical notes page on GitHub)[TBD].

Reviewer: @acmorrow Is there a link I can add here or do we want to leave this out for now?
